Propulsion technologies
-----------------------

:slug: areas/propulsion
:status: hidden
:lang: en

|

Recent trends in the space community for smaller, cheaper and more frequent space 
missions have driven the development of micro- and nanosatellites. The use of small 
spacecraft constellations is an attempt to enhance the overall performance of 
communication and remote sensing tasks currently done by a relatively small number 
of large platforms. Because micro-technologies have the advantage of reducing the 
total resources required on a spacecraft, the continued development of micro-technologies 
for space applications will further enable small satellite missions. Nanosatellites 
(mass between 1 and 10 kg) impose significant limitations on mass, power and volume
available for all subsystems including propulsion. In recent years, micropropulsion 
systems have been developed to address this need. A wide array of concepts will 
require the expansion of propellant gases through microscale nozzles. Because 
many micropropulsion systems will also operate at relatively low pressures, the 
investigation of low-Reynolds-number nozzle and jet flows has become increasingly
important for realistic evaluation of new concepts.

When in orbit, spacecraft require on-board or secondary propulsion systems to perform 
orbit transfer, orbit maintenance, and attitude control maneuvers. An important 
issue in the use of any spacecraft propulsion system involves the assessment and 
reduction of effects caused by the interaction between the thruster plume and 
spacecraft surfaces. Direct impingement of a thruster plume on surfaces can generate 
unwanted torques, localized surface heating, and surface contamination. Self-impingement 
(i.e. the impingement of a thruster plume on a host satellite surface) generally 
occurs for small surface angles with respect to the propulsion system’s thrust 
vector or occurs in the thruster back flow. Cross impingement (i.e. the impingement 
of one spacecraft’s thruster plume onto another spacecraft) can occur at essentially 
any angle and is becoming increasingly important with the advent of microsatellite 
constellations. Although there have been few reported incidents of spacecraft 
failing because of spacecraft interaction effects from the secondary propulsion 
system, the tighter margins of contemporary spacecraft operation require improved 
optimization of all spacecraft systems. Improved assessment of the interaction 
potential of a thruster may also allow propulsion systems on spacecraft that are 
extremely sensitive to contamination concerns. Accurate prediction of plume interaction 
effects is technically challenging. It is very difficult and expensive to recreate 
the in-orbit environment within a ground-based laboratory facility. In terms of 
modeling, the flow physics associated with chemical and plasma propulsion systems 
is complex, requiring the development of advanced numerical techniques. In the past, 
due to the lack of detailed information, the prevention of the plume effects described 
here has been achieved primarily using very conservative spacecraft design. In the 
past few years, significant advances have been made in terms of both experimental 
facilities and numerical methods for the measurement and computation of the plumes 
of spacecraft secondary propulsion systems.

Therefore, this is an appropriate time to consider advancing the current state-of-the-art 
in numerical modeling for this important area of spacecraft design. This proposal 
seeks to address spacecraft-thruster interaction issues for both chemical and 
electric propulsion systems. As new thruster technologies are developed, investigations 
of spacecraft-thruster interactions will continue, and as new spacecraft technologies 
are developed, these studies will become increasingly important. The present project 
will involve numerical studies of exhaustion of gas jets of real spacecraft thrusters 
into vacuum. Such studies are necessary to estimate contamination and the action 
of these jets both on the spacecraft itself and on another spacecraft during orbital
docking and undocking. Jet exhaustion occurs in a rapidly changing sequence of flow 
regimes: from continuum (inside the nozzle) through transitional (near the nozzle 
exit) to free-molecular (at a large distance from the nozzle exit). The flow is 
usually in an essentially non-equilibrium state. Numerical investigations will be 
performed by using two approaches: solving the Navier-Stokes equations inside the 
nozzle and using the DSMC method outside the nozzle. As the jet is sufficiently 
dense near the nozzle exit, the DSMC requires significant computational resources 
(memory and speed). Therefore, it is necessary to use massive parallel computers 
and a multizone approach where the results of computations in a certain domain 
around the nozzle are used as the boundary conditions for computations in a greater 
domain. The flow generated by interaction of several jets will be simulated. Efforts 
will be put into development of an approximate analytical model which will allow 
for determination of plume far field parameters using nozzle exit data and to assess 
the contamination of the spacecraft/satellite surface.

An alternative concept that can be used to fulfill on-orbit propulsion tasks (such 
as orientation and orbit correction) are electric thrusters. Their basic advantage 
over thermochemical control engines is a higher jet exhaustion velocity and, 
correspondingly, a lower flow rate of the working gas at an identical thrust 
(i.e., a higher specific impulse). One of the major problems of using these engines 
is the interaction of the plasma jet from the engine with the surfaces of solar 
arrays, radiators, and other sensitive elements of the space vehicle. A typical 
feature of the jets of such engines is an extremely high degree of thermal 
non-equilibrium of the flow, which necessitates the use of the kinetic approach 
based on the particle-in-cell/DSMC technique. Problems of exhaustion of jets from 
such engines into the space and interaction of these jets with the vehicle surface 
will be considered within the framework of this project. In particular, the PIC 
module for treating the charged particles will be implemented into the proposed 
DSMC GPU code. A state-of-the-art hydrodynamic model will be employed to simulate 
electrons while ions will be treated as particles in the conventional 
particle-in-cell/DSMC fashion. Modeling of the electric thruster plumes and their 
interaction with a 3D satellite/spacecraft models will be performed in order to 
assess possible impairment of communication systems, scientific instrumentations 
and solar arrays. A computational tool for prediction of electric thruster plume/satellite 
interaction will be developed as a deliverable in the framework of the proposed 
project. Special attention will be paid to validation of the physical and chemical 
models of the electric thruster plumes against ground-based experiments.
