Instability and transition to turbulence in high-speed flows
------------------------------------------------------------

:slug: areas/turb
:status: hidden
:lang: en

|

Rapid development of computer engineering resulted in great progress in numerical 
simulation of flow instabilities, the laminar-turbulent transition and turbulence. 
Direct Numerical Simulation (DNS) transitional and turbulent flows have become 
widely spread. It is used in one of the basic research areas where the facilities 
of the largest supercomputer centers are involved. However, numerical simulation 
of development of instabilities and the transition in high-speed and/or non-equilibrium 
flows is much less advanced than similar studies in low-speed equilibrium flows. 
Nevertheless, better understanding and possibility of controlling the transition 
to turbulence is one of the most important conditions of the development of promising 
hypersonic flying vehicles and also is of great importance for design of safer 
re-entry capsules.

It is planned that DNS computer codes based on high-resolution shock capturing 
techniques such as WENO (weighted essentially non-oscillatory) schemes will be 
developed the laboratory and applied to study this problem. The development of 
flow instability and the transition to turbulence in the boundary layer will be 
modeled at hypersonic velocities. Specific features of the transition with the 
so-called second mode of instability dominating in the flow at high Mach numbers 
will be examined. The planned investigations can only be successfully performed 
in close collaboration of numerical and experimental researchers within the laboratory, 
which involves the possibility of performing special experiments with the use of 
the most advanced methods of experimental diagnostics. Particular attention will 
be paid to studying the possibility of laminar-turbulent transition control. 
Stabilization of a hypersonic boundary layer with the use of ultrasound-absorbing 
porous coatings will be studied numerically and experimentally. It is known that
such coatings can substantially delay the development of the second mode of instability, 
but later three-dimensional stages of the transition in the boundary layer on a 
sound-absorbing wall have not been simulated until now. The boundary conditions 
for numerical simulations will be developed on the basis of numerical analysis of 
non-equilibrium flow in the porous media by kinetic approach (DSMC and ES-BGK). 
It is also planned to study the possibility of controlling the laminar-turbulent 
transition by means of local heating, including the use of interference control 
where the development of the Tollmien-Schlichting waves is suppressed by destructive 
interference with perturbations generated by local heating of the surface.

The influence of real gas effects on generation and development of disturbances 
in the boundary layer will be studied. Relaxation effects may significantly influence 
transition to turbulence, causing the transition Reynolds number of flows to be 
increased by almost an order of magnitude. Transition delay caused by the flow 
non-equilibrium should be accounted in aerospace vehicle design. It is planned to
study non-equilibrium aerophysics of high-temperature hypersonic gas flow containing 
both diatomic and polyatomic molecules. This problem is directly related to entry 
of space vehicles into atmospheres of Mars, Venus, Jupiter, Saturn, and their satellites. 
Owing to planned launches of space vehicles to these celestial bodies, the study 
of real gas effects on gas dynamics of the flow, thermal loads of reentry vehicles, 
and stability of the hypersonic boundary layer on their surface is one of the major 
priorities of the worldwide aerospace community for the next decade.

In the framework of the project the influence of the composition and the relative 
amount of polyatomic additives in the flow on the position of the laminar-turbulent 
transition and wave processes in the boundary layer will be determined. The project 
includes a comprehensive study of the emergence and evolution of disturbances in 
a hypersonic viscous shock layer at extremely high free-stream velocities (M = 12-21). 
The viscous shock layer is a flow region between the body surface and the bow 
shock wave. It is formed on the leading edges of hypersonic flying vehicles, where 
the local Reynolds number is still not too high and viscous forces dominate in the 
flow region behind the bow shock wave. Disturbances generated in the shock layer 
propagate further downstream and affect the evolution of instability and the 
laminar-turbulent transition in the hypersonic boundary layer of the flying vehicle 
as a whole. For this reason, the problem of controlling the intensity of disturbances 
in the hypersonic shock layer seems rather urgent. Generation of perturbations 
under the action of acoustic waves from the external flow (receptivity process) 
and blowing-suction on the plate surface will be considered. A method of flow 
control with sound-absorbing coatings will be tested for a flat plate at incidence. 
At non-zero angles of attack, disturbances of three instability modes (vortex, 
entropy, and acoustic modes) arise simultaneously in the shock layer, which 
substantially complicates controlling these disturbances. 

To extend these results to the real flight conditions, non-equilibrium effects, 
due to the excitation of vibrational degrees of freedom of molecules and physical 
and chemical transformations, will be investigated. For this purpose, data on the 
characteristics of the disturbances generated by external perturbations in the 
high-temperature gas mixture flow around a flat plate will be resulted from experimental 
and computational investigations, the effectiveness of suppression of pulsations 
with sound-absorbing coating surface taking into account of real gas effects will 
be determined and the most effective sound-absorbing materials will be chosen.

.. class:: button small

.. class:: myw

`Back <../areas.html>`_

